31 Aalways giving a gift with the pure thought for the sake of awakening, [the bodhisatvas]
do not expect any reward (vipāka).They, having been pleased and delighted (hṛṣṭatuṣṭa), never
feel regret about it. And they, having been liberated, always give a gift.

32 The wise people, having understood the fact that all moments of existence are like an illusion
(māyopama), are not attached to their bodies and lives (kāyajīvita).They never hold
on them, in such a way, they are certain to attain the awakening (sambodhi niyato mataḥ).

33 Although they give everything (sarvatyāga), they are not unhappy, and in that [generosity],
they are not dejected and despondent (aviṣādānavalīna).Because of that, they meditate on
the dharmas being just as open space (gagana), and there is no elation or dejection.

34 Since their nature is originally pure, they give a gift with the purity of awakening.Since
they are not attached to (asakta) their train of thoughts (cittasaṃtāna), they give a gift
without any discursive thinking (niṣprapañca).

35 Giving a gift with the same thought (samacitta) and same mind (samamanas), they give without
the three [kinds of discrimination of] superior, mediocre, and inferior (hīnamadhyaviśiṣṭa).Since
their intentions (āśaya) are pure (pariśuddha) and undefiled, they do not expect
any reward (vipāka).

36 Unlike giving (dāna), body and life are impermanent (anitya), and possessions (bhoga) are
just like a dream (svapna) and a lightning (vidyut).Having generated compassion (karuṇā)
for the whole world, they give a gift, being undefiled (anupalipta) by the worldly elements
(lokadharma).

37 They give the whole of their possessions (sarvasva) for the sake of the purification of afflictions
(kleśa), and decide to establish the word of the Victorious One (jina).None of
the Evil Ones (māra) are able to get at them (na avatāraṃ lapsyante), and they, having understood
in such a way, give away everything (sarvatyāga).

38 Giving by means of ten powers (daśabala) is the root, it is taught. Being based on that,
they are endowed with morality (śīla).They, having been established in the qualities of morality
(śīlaguṇa), attain meditation (dhyāna), and fulfill (paripūrayati) the qualities of
unattached insight (asaktaprajñā).

39 Their thoughts are satisfied with giving (dāna) and discipline (vinaya), and their afflictions
(kleśa), having been burned (dagdha), do not arise [again].Giving is taught for the
benefit of oneself and others (svapara), and they are happy because the giving causes benefit
and comport (hitasukha).

40 They give a gift for the sake of virtue (kuśala) and getting rid of afflictions (kleśaprahāṇa),
for that reason they do not desire to grasp (grāha) [anything].Giving is not only for
the sake of the afflictions of others but also for the sake of awakening which is purity
of one’s own mind.

41 The more (yathā yathā) they give [a gift] with the undiminished thought (anavalīnacitta),
the more (tathā tathā) they attain the quality of awakening.The more they attain the quality
of awakening, the more they satisfy a hundred living beings.

2. ŚīlaThen the Lord said this to the bodhisatva, the great being Gaganagañja (atha khalu bhagavān
gaganagañjaṃ bodhisatvaṃ mahāsatvam āmantrayate sma):

