Then, the Lord went on to speak these verses (atha khalu bhagavāṃs tasyāṃ velāyāṃ imā gāthā
abhāṣata):

77 Insight cuts off wrong views (darśana), darkness (andhakāra) and vices (kleśa), removes the
defilement of habitual tendency (vāsanakleśa), reveals (nidṛś-) causes, conditions, effects
(hetupratyayakiryā), and eliminates all extremes (sarvānta).

78 Insight is not dependent on self, living beings, individual, and life principle (ātmasatvapudgalajīva),
makes [living beings] free from existence and non-existence (bhāvābhāva), and
teaches them to practice the perfection of insight (prajñāpāramitā).

79 Insight is free from vices (kleśa) because it conquers the Evil Ones (māra); it saves [living
beings] out of the stream (augha) and releases them; it creates knowledge (jñāna) and
related behaviour; and it reveals the highest happiness of liberation (mokṣa).

80 Insight purifies the root of hinderance (āvaraṇamūla); it is the mark of knowledge (parijñā)
about the part of personality and spheres (skandhadhātu); it is the liberation from its
characteristics since there is no distinction between a characteristic and something to
be characterized (lakṣaṇalakṣya). By attaining the insight, he is adorned in the three realms.

81 Pure behaviour (pariśuddhacaryā) is called insight (prajñeti), and therefore it is a behaviour
not sullied (sarvalokānupalipta) by anything in the world. [If] he practice to understand
the practice of [insight], he who has pure insight will be adorned.

82 The dharma is taught in order to purify the five kinds of sight (pañcacakṣur), to illuminate
the five kinds of abilities (pañcendriya), to eliminate the five states of existence (pañcagati),
and to makes the five aggregates disappear (pañcaskandha).

83 It is not dependent on this side nor that side, but established in the sphere of all moments
of existence (dharmadhātuḥ), same as the sameness of the sky (āntarīkṣa), and it exalts
a being in accordance with the knowledge of the Buddha (buddhajñāna).

84 It teaches the way of entering into immortality (amṛta) where all the noble ones have gone,
which is free from the duality of gain and loss (alābhalābha), but still does not construct
thought-constructions belonging to the middle way of logical proposition (madhyakalpana).

85 Having thought suffering (duḥkha), in this manner, it gets rid of craving (tṛṣṇā). Having
shown ways, it declares its extinction (nirodha).It enters into the insight (prajñā) to understand
truth (satya), thereby cuts off the past (pūrvānta).

86 All fields of perception (sarvakṣetra) are not being like fields of perception. All moments
of existence (sarvadharma) are distinct from (pravivikta) being like any moments of existence.
All beings (sarvasatva) are same as beings without the self (anātma). The insight
investigating with intelligence knows this.

7. PuṇyaHow then, son of good family, does the merit of bodhisatvas become like the expanse
of the sky (tatra kulaputra katamo bodhisatvānāṃ puṇyaṃ gaganasamam)?The qualities of the
Buddha (buddhadharma) are just like the expanse of the sky, and their potential, the thought
of awakening (bodhicittabīja), is also like the expanse of the sky.Because, son of good
family, although he accumulates the merit of bodhisatva, he never forgets the thought of
awakening (bodhicittāvirahita), and collecting the roots of good (kuśalamūla), he transforms
(pariṇāmayati) those accumulations into omniscience (sarvajñātā), and thus establish them
(pratiṣṭhita) in being like the immeasurable expanse of the sky.The bodhisatva should think
thus: “I will accumulate (abhisaṃkaromi) immeasurable merits in the same way as the expanse
the sky is immeasurable.”Since the effort is endless (apramāṇārambha), it increases
into an immeasurable good (apramāṇārtha). Here the bodhisatva should strive (yogaḥ karaṇīyaḥ)
for immeasurable accumulations of merit (aprameyapuṇyasaṃbhāra);

