Verses 87-118Then on that occasion the Lord uttered these verses (atha khalu bhagavāṃs tasyāṃ
velāyāṃ imā gāthā abhāṣata):87 The wise one whose thought is detached from any viewpoint
(dṛṣti), who accumulates merits (puṇya), who is without the appearance of distinguishing
marks (nimittāvyutthāna), and who transforms everything into awakening, becomes imperishable.

88 Having abandoned pride and conceit (mānātimāna), seeking for the accumulation of knowledge
(jñānasaṃbhāra), the wise one, having the nature of infinite space (anantagaganasvabhāva),
fulfils the knowledge of omniscience (sarvajñajñānaṃ paripūrayati).

89 Son of the Victorious One (jinaputra), the recollection of the Buddha (buddhānusmṛti) is
without the nature of form or essential character (rūpalakṣaṇadharmatā). Where there is no
moving of thought or mind (cittamanas), there is the recollection of the Buddha.

90 The dharma which is free from desire (rāga), essentially transcendent, always peaceful and
calm, the absence of distinguishing marks (animitta), and is free from any objective support
(sarvālambana) is the recollection of the dharma (dharmānusmṛti).

91 The holy Saṃgha which is unconditioned (anabhisaṃskṛta), empty (śūnyatā), without distinguishing
marks (animitta), liberated from wishing (praṇidhāna) and in which there is no thinking
nor any activity of recollection is the recollection of the Saṇgha (saṃghānusmṛti).

92 The renunciation which abandons all parts of personality (sarvaskandha), gives away any object
of vices (sarvakleśavastu), purified from thought-constructions and discriminations
(kalpavikalpa) without arrogance is the recollection of renunciation (tyāgānusmṛti).

93 The morality which is unsullied (anāsrava), unconditioned (asaṃskṛta), without any activity
of body, speech or mind (kāyavākcitta), without any origination, and not dependent on the
triple states of existence (tribhava) is the recollection of morality (śīlānusmṛti).

94 God is pure and free from impurity (mala) or vices (kleśa), dwells in the Tuṣita Heaven (tuṣitabhavanastha),
and obtains the stage of consecration (abhiṣeka). Recollecting such pure
beings, one thinks “I will also become like him, the Lord, soon.”

95 Grasping the true dharma (saddharma) of the Tathāgata is not to grasp any object of vices
(sarvekleśavastu) and to be liberated from both truth or untruth (dharmādharma), that is
the grasping the true dharma of the Victorious One (Jina).

96 The Victorious One (jina) attains the essential character of awakening (bodhilakṣaṇa), and
grasps the essential character of the dharma (dharmalakṣaṇa). That by which he knows the
limit of reality (bhūtakoṭi) without impurities is the obtaining all qualities of the Buddha
(buddhadharma).

97 If you are pure yourself, living beings (satva) are also pure. The one who penetrates the
wisdom that all dharmas are pure, his mind is basically pure (prakṛtiprabhāsvara), and he
brings living beings to maturity in order for them to get rid of [the misunderstanding of
an eternal] life principle (satva).

98 Not destroying (avināśayati) the sphere of living beings (satvadhātu), not seeing decreasing
or increasing, teaching the abandonment of erroneous viewpoint, thus he purifies many
beings (bahusatva).

99 He who teaches the sphere of this world, also teaches the sphere of the Buddha (buddhaviṣaya);
the sphere of the Buddha is just like open space (gagana), in this way he understands
the sphere of this world.

100 When you see all sounds and syllables as an echo (pratiśrutkā), hearing disappears. This
kind of insight (prajñā) is to obtain the memory (dhāraṇī).

101 While remembering, reciting, and explaining various teachings of the dharma, if you do not
have any conception of self, living beings or even the dharma, then that is being established
in memory (dhāraṇī).

102 Keeping the words of the Victorious One (jina), satisfying all living beings by eloquent
speech (subhāṣita), never being separated from concentration (samādhi) with pure recollection,
that is the qualities of the certainty of the memory (dhāraṇīniyāmaguṇa).

103 Not accumulating the dharma, not moving or wavering in the dharma, just as the nāgas bring
down the incessant rain, so you should pour down the rain of the dharma (dharmavarṣa).

104 Eloquence (pratibhāna) which is the sources of good qualities (guṇākara) is without hindrance
or interruption and is explaining thousand koṭis of sūtras (sūtrasahasrakoṭi) without
discrimination of living beings by their abilities (satvendriya).

105 By the power of the Buddha (buddhānubhāva), for the thousands koṭis of aeons, the dharma
has been taught uninterruptedly. Living beings have been satisfied according to their wishes
because the qualities of the Buddha have been established by the principle of eloquence
(pratibhāna).

106 “All these dharmas are just as empty space,” knowing the aspects of all dharmas like this,
he does not hold any concept of living beings, life principle, or person, this is to transcend
the Māra inherent in the parts of personality (skandhamāra).

107 Since all living beings are originally extinguished (prakṛtinirvṛta), they are never born.
His patience shining like this is not carelessness (apramāda) about this teaching.

108 Seeing all parts of personality (skandha) as an illusion (māyā), knowing all spheres as
the sphere of the dharma (dharmadhātu), considering the six sense organs (ṣaḍindriya) as an
empty town (śūnyagrāma), this is to transcend the Māra inherent in the parts of personality
(skandhamāra).

109 Being aware of that vices (kleśa) are just like a mass of clouds (abhrakūṭa), examining
the dharma correctly, and not making any thought-construction or fiction (akalpāvikalpa),
this is to transcend the Māra inherent in vices (kleśamāra).

110 He who knows that there is no arising of birth, death, or transmigration, and there is no
coming or going of the dharmas, he is not subject to the Māra of death (mṛtyumāra).

111 He who has no agitated or conceited thinking, who nurtures no idea of awakening (bodhisaṃjñā)
even while abiding in awakening, and who practices compassion (karuṇā) even though he
nurtures no idea of a self or living beings, he conquers the Māra and his forces (sabala).

112 Seeing both consciousness and knowledge (vijñānajñāna) equally, not being established in
the conditioned nor the unconditioned, and regarding the thoughts of migrating beings (jagaccitta)
as an illusion (māyā), that is the heroic uncrushability (anavamṛdya).

113 Not being attached to this side nor that side, sailing the vessel of the dharma (dharmanau),
and liberating living beings without any idea of them, that is called the sameness of
the bodhisatva.

114 He who knows that the three realms are just like a wilderness (kāntāra) which is void and
unchangeable, but who still liberates living beings according to regular order (anupūrva),
he is a caravan leader (sārthavāha) who guides the way to ambrosia (amṛta).

115 The learned who is skilled in the proper way and the improper way, who knows that the dharmas
are empty from the very beginning, but who still leads [living beings] to liberation
(nirvāṇa) by logical way, he is the bodhisatva called ‘a leader (nāyaka).’

116 He who knows that the train of thoughts (cittasaṃtāna) always changes into somethings else,
the [present] thought is not connected to the [past or future] thoughts, and thus the
train of thoughts is migrating, he is the bodhisatva called ‘a principle (pariṇāyaka).’

117 Just as the nature of open space (gaganasvabhāva) or the moon reflected in water (udakacandra),
all dharmas are pure and impeccable. Not being contaminated by any vice (kleśa), pure
beings (pariśuddhasatva) are irreproachable (anindita).

118 He who, by a single dharma, knows that all dharmas are ungraspable, void, unreal, and impermanent
just like an illusion or a mirage, he will soon reach the place of awakening.(ekena
dharmeṇa tu sarvadharmān anugacchate māyamarīcisādṛśān ||agrāhyatucchān alikān aśāśvatān
so bodhimāṇḍaṃ na cireṇa gaccati ||)Quotation from Pras p.128,6-9; PrasTib 43a7.Pras: āryagaganagañjasamādhisūtre
’pi ekena dharmeṇa tu sarvadharmān anugacchate māyamarīcisādṛśān
| agrāhyatucchān alikān aśāśvatān so bodhimāṇḍaṃ na cireṇa gaccati || iti || PrasTib: ’phags
pa nam mkha’ mdzod kyi tiṅ ṅe ’dzin gyi mdo las kyaṅ || chos gcig gis ni chos rnams thams
cad sgyu ma daṅ || smig rgyu daṅ ’dra gzuṅ byar med ciṅ gsog daṅ ni || brdzun zhiṅ ther
zug min par rjes su rtogs gyur pa || de ni ring por mi thogs byaṅ chub sñing por ’gro ||

