Then, the Lord went on to speak these verses (atha khalu bhagavāṃs tasyāṃ velāyāṃ imā gāthā
abhāṣata).

42 [The bodhisatvas] are without distress (atapta) because of undefiled thought through protecting
(rakṣaṇa) the morality, and their body and thought are pure because of restraint in
speech and mind.

43 The wise people always [remain] in the inner peace (adhyātmopaśama), not having pride of
conceit (agarvita) by means of the morality. They are not fixed on the interrupted consciousness
and thought, depending on the thought of awakening (bodhicitta).

44 Action (karma), which is neither created (akṛta) nor imagined (acintya) and which is thus
not discriminated (akalpita), does not have any form (rūpa) or color (varṇa) such as red,
blue, and yellow.

45 The morality is formless (arūpya), untrue (asatya), unmoving (aniñjya), and tranquil (vivikta)
just like empty space, and the wise praises it because of the whole, not on the ground
of the belief of it.

46 The morality pacifies [minds], pacifies afflictions (kleśa), brings to the completion of
the mental quiescence and transcendental analysis (śamathavipaśyana), and guides to the ultimate
[liberation].

47 They, who are released from the bondage (bandhana) of actions (karma), remain (sevante) in
the morality. Thus the morality causes the liberation (vimokṣa) and becomes the basis of
the awakening (bodhi).

48 They, who perform the ascetic practices (dhūta) in a solitary place (araṇya), know how to
be satisfied (saṃtuṣṭa) with few desires, and purify their thoughts by meditating (dhyāna)
separated from assembly with severe austerity (saṃlekha).

49 By means of the basis of the morality, they reflect on verses (pāda) supporting liberation.
Thus they remain in the way of happiness and liberation as adorned with the morality.

50 They are beyond distraction (vikṣepa) and conceited thoughts (manyanā) by cutting off the
afflicted view (kliṣṭadṛṣṭi), and they attain the ultimate perfection (niṣṭā) after having
spread friendliness (maitrī) just as the expense of the sky (gaganasama).

51 Never having abandoned the certainty of reaching awakening (bodhiniyama), they never make
false discrimination (na vikalpayati) of awakening. The wise people who are content in that
way attain the perfection of the morality (śīlapāramitā).

gaganagañjaparipṛcchā, volume 23. KṣāntiHow then, son of good family, does the patience of the
bodhisatvas becomes like empty space (tatra kathaṃ kulaputra bodhisatvasya kṣāntiṃ gaganasamam)?

