25. DharmadhātuHow then, son of good family, does the bodhisatva relate to the guiding principle
of the sphere of moments of existence (dharmadhātunaya), being united with (samavasarati)
the sphere of all moments of existence (sarvadharmadhātu)?‘The sphere of moments of existence
(dharmadhātu)’ is the sphere that is free from desire since it is free from any impurity
(rāgavigatadhātuḥ sarvarajavigatatayā?);the sphere of non-origination (anutpanna)
since it is not something in particular (asamudānīta);the sphere without cessation (anirodha)
since there is no occurrence;the sphere that does not go anywhere (agamanatā) since there
is no transmigration (gamana);the sphere without coming (anāgamanatā) since there is no
passing over;the sphere without abiding since there is no arising;the sphere as it really
is (yathāvaddharmadhātu) because of its sameness in all three times (tryadhvasamatā);the
sphere of self (ātmadhātu) since it is originally pure (ādiviśuddhi);1the sphere without
personality (niḥpudgaladhātu) since it is the highest truth (paramārtha);the sphere without
information (avijñāptidhātu) since it is non-abiding;the sphere without basis (anālayadhātu)
since there is no contamination (saṃkīrṇa);the sphere without birth (anutpādadhātu) since
it is fixed (niyāma);the sphere like the space (gaganadhātu) since it is essentially
tranquil (svabhāva_pariśuddhi);the sphere of liberation (nirvāṇadhātu) since there is no argument
against it (apratipakṣa);such is the entrance into the way of the sphere of moments
of existence (dharmadhātunayapreveśa).Since all moments of existence are like this, son
of good family, if the bodhisatva enteres into the way of moments of existence, then, whatever
he says, expresses, or teaches, all that is united with (samavasṛta) the sphere of moments
of existence.Having entered into the way of the sphere of moments of existence, he knows
the fact that there is no duality of the sphere of desire and the moments of existence
(rāgadhātudharmadhātu)- why? - because the desire (rāga) has the nature of the sphere of
all moments of existence;there is no duality of the sphere of aversion (dveṣadhātu) and the
sphere of moments of existence - why? - because aversion has the nature of the sphere of
all moments of existence;there is no duality of the sphere of delusion (mohadhātu) and the
sphere of moments of existence - why? -because delusion has the nature of all moments of
existence;there is no duality of the sphere of vices (kleśadhātu) and the sphere of moments
of existence - why? - because vices has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;there
is no duality of the sphere of passion (kāmadhātu) and the sphere of moments
of existence - why? - because passion has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;there
is no duality of the sphere of forms (rūpadhātu) and the sphere of moments of existence
- why? - because forms has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;there
is no duality of the sphere without form (ārūpyadhātu) and the sphere of moments of existence
- why? - because the formlessness has the nature of the sphere of all moments of
existence;there is no duality of the sphere of the eye (cakṣurdhātu) and the sphere of moments
of existence - why? - because the eye has the nature of the sphere of all moments of
existence;there is no duality of the sphere of forms (rūpadhātu) and the sphere of moments
of existence - why? - because forms has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;there
is no duality of the sphere of eye-consciousness (cakṣurvijñānadhātu) and the sphere
of moments of existence - why? - because eye-consciousness has the nature of the sphere
of all moments of existence;there is no duality of the sphere in the interval of mind and
the sphere of moments of existence - why? - because the sphere of mind has the nature of
the sphere of all moments of existence;there is no duality of the sphere of mind-consciousness
(manovijñānadhātu) and the sphere of moments of existence - why? - because the sphere
of mind-consciousness has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;there is
no duality of the sphere of aggregates (skandhadhātu) and the sphere of moments of existence
- why? - because the sphere of aggregates has the nature of the sphere of all moments
of existence;there is no duality of the sphere of earth, water, fire or wind (pṛthivīdhātvabdhātutejodhātuvāyudhātu)
and the sphere of moments of existence - why? - because the earth,
water, fire or wind has the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence;there is
no duality of the eighty-four thousand masses of religious teaching (caturaśītidharmaskandhasahasranirdeśa),
the eighty-four thousand kinds of behaviour (caturaśītisahasracaritāna)
or all moments of existence (sarvadharma) and the sphere of all moments of existence - why?
- because all moments of existence have the nature of the sphere of all moments of existence.The
bodhisatva knows all moments of existence since the moments of existence which is
the entrance into the sameness (samatāpraveśa) is united with all moments of existence.
Son of good family, this is the entering into the way of moments of existence of the bodhisatva.

