Then, the Lord went on to speak these verses (atha khalu bhagavāṃs tasyāṃ velāyāṃ imā gāthā
abhāṣata):

57 After having generated the power by the strength of vigour, you should not hold your body
and life (kāyajīvita) dear.Train yourself in the practice of the awakening of the great one
(māhātmya) and have an attitude of benefit to living beings.

58 As long as you have accumulated conditioned states in previous existences (pūrvabhava), that
long you will stay in cyclic existence, trying to arrive at the qualities of awakening
(bodhiguṇa),but you still should not get tired: do generate vigour again and again.

59 Strive to release incalculable numbers of beings, to worship innumerable buddhas, to see
countless Buddha-fields, and to discipline numerous evil ones (māra).

60 Strive to give countless gifts, to maintain inconceivable morality (śīla), to train yourself
in inconceivable patience (kṣānti), and to practice unthinkable vigour (vīrya).

61 Strive to reflect on unthinkable meditation (dhyāna), to cultivate inconceivable insight
(prajñā), to develop inconceivable friendliness (maitrī), and to achieve benefits and merits
(guṇā).

62 Strive not to hold life (jīva) and body (kāya) dear, to be liberated from all afflictions
(kleśa) and conflicts (kalaha), to understand emptiness (śūnyatā), liberation (vimokṣa) and
selflessness (nirātmya), and [to achieve] the nature of greatness (māhātmya) which is selflessness
in oneself.

63 Strive for awakening (bodhi) freed from false view (darśana), and for essential nature (svabhāva)
which is like an illusion (māya) and mirage (marīci).Strive to attain non-thought
(acitta), even though the thought does not exist in reality, and to teach unchanging dharmas.

64 Even though engaged with all beings, he is still free from them; he always strives to recite
and read,but he transcends truth or untruth (dharmādharma) and strives for the essential
nature of words and letters (śabdākṣarasvabhāva).

65 He explains thousands of scriptures to living beings, even though the qualities of the Buddha
(buddhaguṇa) are incalculable.Even though the bad behaviour of living beings (satvacarita)
is endless, the wise will always practice vigour [on their behalf].

66 He should be engaged in the behaviour of the endless numbers of living beings, [even though]
these dharmas never arise nor disappear (anutpādānirodha).Not being discouraged, the wise
men should practice great wave of vigour again and again and guide beings to cultivate
such teachings.

5. DhyānaHow, son of good family, does the meditation of the bodhisatva become like empty space
(kathaṃ kulaputra bodhisatvasya dhyānaṃ gaganasamam)?

