Then, the Lord went on to speak these verses (atha khalu bhagavāṃs tasyāṃ velāyāṃ imā gāthā
abhāṣata):

67 They purify the abilities of perception (indriya) by meditation, and concentrate with one-pointed
mind (ekāgramanas) by recollection (smṛti).Even though they are not dependent on
anything, they still remains absorbed in sameness toward all beings (sarvajagat).

68 Even though they remain in the inner and outer aspects of existence, they are not dependent
on the parts of personality, fields of the senses, or spheres (skandhāyatanadhātu).[Staying]
in the transcendent sphere (vivekagocara) of tranquility (upaśānta), the wise are always
in the state of concentration (samāhita).

69 Since they are always concentrated in universal sameness (samatā), their minds (manas) are
similar to (samasadṛśa) the sphere of the dharma (dharmadhātu).Their thoughts are absolutely
dissociated (atyantavivikta), but they still manifest it. The wise meditate on everything,
but they are not attached to anything.

70 In order to bring living beings to maturity, they teach about the end of death (cyuti) and
birth (jāti).They never give up (parijahāti) concentrating (samādhi), they are the way they
are by the power of the understanding of thoughts (cittāvabodhi).

71 While in the state of concentration (samādhi) of the sphere without form (ārūpyadhātu), [they
still practice] for the sake of the maturation (pariṇāmanā) of living beings.Illuminating
the sphere of desire (kāmadhātu), they are dependent on neither themselves nor living
beings.

72 The sphere of existence is like empty space (gagana), an illusion (māyā), a mirage (marīci),
like a dream (svapna), the moon reflected in water (udakacandra), and a cloud (megha).They,
having understood the essential character of all dharmas like this, always remain in
the state of concentration.

73 In the sphere of thoughts (cittagocara) with all beings, they engage their though and consciousness
in living beings.Since their continuity of thoughs (cittasaṃtāṇa) is unobstructed
(anāvaraṇa), they have insight (prajñā) also in the continuity of their own thoughts.

74 By means of skill in meditation (dhyāna) and the supernormal knowledge of magical power (ṛddhyabhijñā),
they go to a great number of millions of Buddha-fields (buddhakṣetra) to make
offerings to innumerable Buddhas, with a mind removed from the vice of all ignorance (sarvājñānakleśa),

75 Having trained senses (indriya) and [attained] the tranquility of minds, they become perfected
in peaceful meditation (śamatha) without any false discrimination (avikalpa).Having
made living being’s minds tranquil, they are always concentrated on the strength of insight
(prajña).

76 Even if they are in the state of universal sameness, there is nothing to be attained because
it is beyond distinguishing marks (animitta).They who abide in the universal sameness
(samatāpratiṣṭhita) are always in the state of concentration.

6. PrajñāHow, son of good family, does the insight of the bodhisatva become like empty space
(kathaṃ kulaputra bodhisatvasya prajñāṃ gaganasamam)?

