185 This good man, who is filled with one hundred kinds of good qualities, keeping and spreading
his qualities, overcomes evil beings and attains recollection, intelligence and understanding
(smṛtimatigati). When the voice of the best ascetic (śramaṇavara) resonates, cyclic
existences in the ten directions are purified.186 He, who is filled with sublime confidence
(adhimukti), who is free from impurities (rajas) and darkness (tamas), purifying a hundred
[previous] existences, leading gods and humans (devamānuṣa) to the sphere without destruction,
being endowed with ten powers and the sky-like mind, becomes free from existence.187
As he purifies his speech gracefully and gloriously, he has no harshness, erroneousness,
or impurity. Since he is incomparable in the three states of existence (tribhava), he
is respected by gods and humans. Being free from existence, he brings happiness and benefits
to living beings.188 He, who trains himself with confidence, recollection, intelligence
and understanding (adhimuktismṛtimatigati), conquers the power of others (parabala) by means
of ten powers (daśabala) and superior powers, defeats enemy troops, and attains the state
of immortality. O good man, beyond existence, the voice of the wise resonates.189 Even
though he does not go anywhere separated from this assembly, he educates gods and humans
without moving in ten directions. He does not stay any particular place, but he stays with
his intelligence and is unwavering in the realm of the dharma (dharmadhātu), just as earth
is unshakable.190 As the sunshine removes darkness and impurities, so does this good man.
He, who is united with the light of insight, spreads glorious light, thereby all the realm
of Māra, having been filled with the light of the Sage (muni), is outshone (dhyāmīkṛta).191
Just as the wind in open space enters everywhere without any base (sthāna) and has no
thought-constructions (avikalpa) or false imagination (parikalpa), just so the sons of the
buddha (jinaputra) whose minds are like open space are in accordance with all living beings
and thus they are respected by gods and humans.192 The water in the ocean (sāgarajala)
of three thousandfold worlds is measurable, a bird-track in the sky (gaganaśakunipada) in
ten directions is expressible, and someone can have the same thought as all living beings;
but the great qualities (mahāguṇa) of the son of the Sage (muni) are inexhaustible.

Māra Pāpīyān

When this teaching was taught and verses were accomplished, the wicked Māra, having magically
created four kinds of troops (caturaṅgabala), came to the courtyard where the Lord stayed
with them, stationed them on the outside of the courtyard, disguised himself as a householder
(gṛhapati), went in front of the Lord, and bowed down at his feet (bhagavataḥ pādau
śirobhir vanditvā), saying:“Because these good men, the bodhisatva Gaganagañja and Ratnapāṇi,
are endowed with immeasurable good qualities, and so are the other bodhisatvas, it is
possible to manifest such wonderful teachings (āścaryādbhutadharma) and magical displays (prātihārya)
in this world. However, Lord, will there be someone believing these magical displays
in the future?”The Lord said: “As a small amount of water in the great ocean can be
lifted up by means of the tip of a hair (vālāgrakoṭi), so few beings will have faith in the
magical displays (prātihārya) of these good men. However, there will be great many beings
who do not have faith, compared to the quantity of water in the ocean.”Having heard this
word, the wicked Māra, became contented, elated, enraptured, overjoyed, exultant and jubilant
(atha khalu māraḥ pāpīyāṃs tuṣṭodagrāttamanāḥ pramuditaḥ prītisaumanasyajāto bhavati),
danced and was about to leave the congregation.The the venerable Śāriputra addressed himself
to the Lord: “O Lord, who is this man (puruṣa) going away from this congregation with
so much pleasure?”The Lord said: “O Śāriputra, he is the Māra, who, disguised as a householder,
came to the tathāgata in order to make this exposition of religion (dharmaparyāya)
disappear. Having heard that there will be only few beings who have belief in this religious
exposition, he is about to leave this congregation, joyfully singing, ‘There will be only
few followers of the ascetic Gautama, but mine will be numerous.’”At that time the bodhisatva
Gaganagañja said to the wicked Māra: “Wicked One, why are you leaving after having
shown your true colors?”Then the wicked Māra thought: “Because the bodhisatva Gaganagañja
and other bodhisatvas will come to my territory (māragocara), to say nothing of the tathāgata
(prāg eva tathāgataḥ). So now I will go back to my territory.”Then the bodhisatva Gaganagañja,
having stopped the wicked Māra and his servants in the vault of the sky, exercised
his magical power in such a way (tathādhiṣṭhita) that they could not go back to his territory,
and said this to the Māra: “Wicked One, as open space is without obstruction (anavṛti),
why do you not go back to your territory?”Māra said: “Son of good family, the sky is
without obstruction (gaganam anāvṛtam) to you, but it looks dark to us. The only we can see
in front of us is darkness (tamo’ndhakāra), except for the congregation (parṣanmaṇḍala)
of the Buddha on the ground, which looks luminous.”Gaganagañja said: “So it is, Wicked One,
it is beings who have the light of the dharma in their thoughts (śukladharmacittasatva),
and the darkness in front of you is because of the works of Māra (mārakarman).”Māra said:
“O good man, from now on I will never do the works of Māra.”Gaganagañja said: “As it is
difficult to keep your promise among such wicked beings, you should come down here and listen
the discipline of the dharma (dharmavinaya) taught by the tathāgata, together with your
servants.”Then the wicked Māra and his servants unwillingly (akāmaka) went down from the
vault of the sky, and the bodhisatva Gaganagañja said this to the congregation of bodhisatvas:
“Sons of good family, may all of you elucidate (pratibhātu) the gates into the dharma
of transcending the path of the works of Māra (mārakarmamārgasamatikramadharmamukha).”The
bodhisatva Kāñcanaparvatarāja thereupon said: “Giving up your sphere is to be attached to
the sphere of Māra (māraviṣaya). Knowing that everywhere is the sphere of the buddha (buddhaviṣaya)
is to know the sphere of the buddha. If you do not see the sphere of the buddha,
how can you see your own sphere? In that way the bodhisatva who has transcended the sphere
has also transcended the sphere of Māra. This is the gate into the dharma of transcending
the sphere of Māra.”The bodhisatva Ratnaśrī said: “Since the objects of thought is the
sphere of Māra (māragocara), where there is not any dharma perceived, what would be accomplished
by Māra there? Since the attainment is without basis, the understanding through time
that there is no attainment with basis is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending
the sphere of Māra of the bodhisatva.’”The bodhisatva Ratnapāṇi said: “When you grasp or
possess something, then the Māra will find your weak point (avatāraṃ labh-). When you do not
grasp any dharma, there will be no disagreement with anyone. When you are alone without
the second, you do not make your own thinking or own place [into problem], and then how can
you stay together with the Māra? Thus the bodhisatva who is established in nothing transcends
the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Āryaratna said: “‘Sin’ (āpatti) is an accusation,
and in such an accusation the Māra can find a weak point. What is the absence of sin
(anpatti) is not to enter into the consciousness of following in accordance with the distinguishing
marks [of sins] (nimittānusāriṇavijñānāpraveśa), and thus the bodhisatva who is
established in the limit of no distinguishing mark transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The
bodhisatva Ratnacitta said: “The Lord taught that vices (kleśa) are just like a reflection
(pratibimba) and an illusion (pratibhāsa). Knowing that the reflection and illusion are
not changing nor not changing, not coming nor going, without inside nor outside, and remain
in no location or dimension (sthānāsthānavigatā) is not living with any vice. The vices
do not arise due to the absence of thought-construction; the vices do not cease due to the
absence of thought-construction. In this way, the bodhisatva who is established in the absence
of thought-construction and false imagination transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The
bodhisatva Ratnākara said: “Happiness is a latent tendency (anuśaya); unhappiness is an obstruction.
One who is without happiness or unhappiness does not have any affection (anunaya)
or hostility (pratigha). One who is without affection or hostility is established in sameness.
One who is established in sameness does not differentiate any dharma. One who is
established in the absence of differentiation does not think about sameness or non-sameness.
When you obtain this inconceivable dharma, the Māra cannot find your weak point.”The bodhisatva
Ratnaparityāga said: “The works of Māras (mārakarman) is produced from obsession
with self (ātmasamutthāna). When you are established in the purity of self, what can the Māra
do? Why is that? Because vices are purified by the purity of self (ātmaviśuddhi), and
all dharmas are purified by the purity of vices. That which purifies all dharmas purifies
open space. Thus the bodhisatva who is established in the purity of open space transcends
the sphere of the Māra.The bodhisatva Dharmarāja said: “Just as one, who obtains the consecration
of the king (rājābhiṣeka), and who has power and numerous attendants, is fearless,
just so the bodhisatva, who obtains the consecration, and who has the attendants of the jewel
of the dharma (dharmaratna), has no fear of any Māra. Here the consecration is to reach
the extreme of the qualities of the buddha (paryantabuddhadharma) and to fulfill them,
and the attendants of the jewel of the dharma (dharmaratna) is to learn the dharmas taught
by the buddhas in ten directions. Since the bodhisatva who is established in such a way transcends
the sphere of the Māra, this is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the
sphere of the Māra.’”The bodhisatva Śailaśikharasaṃghaṭṭanarāja said: “Just as the wind
enters through a chink, just so the Māra can find a weak point where there is a chink in thought.
The bodhisatva therefore should not have any chink in his thought. Here, the thought
without chink is, that is to say, to fulfill the emptiness endowed with all sorts of excellencies
(tadyathāpi nāma cchidrān mārutaḥ praviśati evam eva yato yata eva cittasya cchidraṃ
bhavati tatas tata eva māro ’vatāraṃ labhate | tasmāt sadā ’cchidracittena bodhisattvena
bhavitavyaṃ tatreyam acchidracittatā | yad idaṃ sarvākārajñatāyāḥ śūnyatāyāḥ paripūrir).
This is the gate to the light of the dharma (dharmālokamukha) that the bodhisatva transcends
the sphere of the Māra.”Quotation from ŚikṣMS 60b5-7; B 117,7-10; ŚikṣTib(D) 67b1-3;
ŚikṣChi(T.1636) 97c27-98a1.ŚikṣMS: āryagaganagañjasūtre ’py uktaṃ (6) tadyathāpi nāma cchidrān
mārutaḥ praviśati evam eva ‹yato›1 yata eva cittasya cchidraṃ bhavati tatas tata eva
māro ’vatāraṃ labhate tasmāt sadā ’cchidracittena bodhisattvena bhavitavyaṃ tatreyam acchidracittatā
| yad idaṃ sarvvākārajñatāyāḥ śūnyatāyāḥ pari(7)pūrir iti |ŚikṣTib: ’phags pa
nam mkha’ mdzod kyi mdo las kyaṅ | ’di lta ste dper na bu ga nas rluṅ ’jug pa de bźin du
gaṅ daṅ gaṅ nas sems la skyon byuṅ ba de daṅ de ñid nas bdud kyis glags rñed do || de lta
bas na byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rtag tu sems la skyon med par bya’o ||ŚikṣChi: 又虚空藏經云譬如孔隙聲入其中。菩薩亦爾。若心有間隙則魔得其便。是故菩薩令心常無間隙。若心無間隙。則諸相圓滿。及空性圓滿。The
bodhisatva Priyadarśana said: “That among
all kinds of seeing, seeing the buddha and his dharma is the most excellent. Here, seeing
the buddha is not to see form, feeling, perception, formative factors or consciousness. The
correct seeing (samyagdṛṣṭi) is to see the buddha. Seeing the dharma is not to make any
mental effort (manasikāra). The unchanging seeing is to be free from attachment (rāga). Being
free from attachment is to see the dharma. That the bodhisatva comes to be endowed with
seeing the buddha and his dharma in that way is transcending the sphere of the Māra. This
is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra.’”The bodhisatva
Indrajālin said: “Since the deeds of the Māra arises from action [of speech], mental activity
and movements [of body] (iñjitamanyanāsyandita), the bodhisatva should be free from the
basis of action [of speech], mental activity and movements [of body], which are superficial
mental activities (ayoniśomanasikāra). With the thorough practice (yoniśaḥprayoga), the
bodhisatva who is free from action [of speech], mental activity and movements [of body]
transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Guṇarājaprabhāsa said: “As many as there
are antidotes (pratipakṣa), so many are the works of the Māra (mārakarman). The absence
of antidote is [included in] the realm of the dharma (dharmadhātu), and all dharmas are [included
in] the realm of the dharma. Since all dharmas are included in the realm of the dharma
(dharmadhātusamavasaraṇa), all the dharmas are understood through understanding the realm
of the dharma. The works of the Māra is not apprehended apart from the realm of the dharma,
and the realm of the dharma which is the same as the works of the Māra is not different
from suchness (tathatā). In this way, the bodhisatva who enters into one single principle
(ekanaya) transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Gandhahastin said: “The weak
(durbala) can be harmed by the Māra; but the strong (balika) cannot be harmed by the Māra.
The weak is afraid of the three gates of liberation (trivimokṣamukha). Since the strong
is not afraid of the three gates of liberation, namely, directly seeing (pratyakṣa), penetrating
(supratividdha), and meditatively cultivating. One who is not afraid of them transcends
the sphere of the Māra, and thus this is the gate into the light of the dharma (dharmālokamukha)
called ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Maitreya said:
“Just as the water in the great ocean (mahāsāgara) has a single taste (ekarasa), so all dharmas
in the great ocean of the knowledge of the dharma (dharmajñānasāgara) have a single
taste. Since the works of the Māra (mārakarma) and the works of the buddha (buddhakarma),
both are same in the perspective of emptiness (śūnyatā), signlessness (animitta), wishlessness
(apraṇihita), birthlessness (ajāti), and the absence of origination (anutpāda), the bodhisatva
who enters into the single taste (ekarasa) transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The
bodhisatva Gaganagañja said: “O friends (vata mārṣāḥ), since open space transcends all spheres,
it is not the sphere of sight (cakṣurviṣaya), and likewise it is not the sphere of
hearing, smelling, tasting, body and mind (śrotraghrāṇajihvākāyamanaḥ). Since all dharmas
are the sphere of the essential nature of open space (gaganasvabhāva), body and speech (kāyavāc)
are the light of knowledge (jñānāloka) in accordance with the sameness of open space
(gaganasamatā). Thus the bodhisatva who obtains this light of knowledge transcends the
sphere of the Māra, and this is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the sphere of
the Māra.’”The bodhisatva Mañjuśrī said: “O good man, all you have said is the works of
the Māra and the sphere of the Māra. Why is that? Things expressed by words are a mere information
(vijñapti); but the speech of the buddha (buddhaghoṣa) is beyond verbal expressions
(anakṣara). Since, as many as are words, so many are the works of the Māra, when there
is not any word, nothing would be done by the Māra. Since that which is without word is without
information, one never perceives the self or other (na ātmaparaṃ samanupaśyati). Since
there is no self or others, the dharma which causes benefit or harm does not exist. Understanding
like this is transcending the sphere of the Māra, and, son of good family, this
is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra of the bodhisatva.’”Then
the bodhisatva Gaganagañja said this to the wicked Māra: “Wicked One, did you hear
this gate into the dharma of transcending the sphere of the Māra?”Māra said: “Yes, I heard.”Gaganagañja
said: “Wicked One, are you still going to do the works of the Māra among the
bodhisatvas who entered into such guiding principle of the dharma (dharmanaya)?”Māra said:
“Son of good family, by hearing this gate into the dharma of transcending the sphere of
the Māra, I would not dare to do the works of the Māra among those who listen to it, to say
nothing of the bodhisatvas who see it directly (pratyakṣa) by their knowledges.”At that
time, four gods, Saṃcayavigata, Sukhasaṃcaya, Gandhavat, and Prāsādavat, who guarded the
bodhisatvas, said to the Wicked Māra:“In the past, at the place of awakening (bodhimaṇḍa),
the Lord met you, your forces, troops, army and servants directly. At that time, the Lord
touched the ground with the jewels in his hand (ratnapāṇi), which are the accumulation of
friendliness, compassion, generosity, discipline, restrain, gentleness, morality, learning,
concentration, insight, firm and burning effort, merit and knowledge (maitrīkaruṇadānavinayasaṃyamasauratyaśīlaśrutasamādhiprajñādṛḍhottaptavīryapuṇyajñānasaṃbhāra),
and then the
endless, limitless worlds (anantāparyanteṣu lokadhātuṣu) were shaken. In that way it was
manifested that you and your forces were defeated, but will you still do the works of Māra
under the Lord and the bodhisatvas? You should pay homage to the tathāgata and the assembly
of the bodhisatvas!”Then the Wicked One, having conjured up canopies adorned with eighty
four thousand jewels (ratnacchattra), offered them to the congregations. Having held numerous
kinds of divine flowers (divyapuṣpa), incense (gandha), garlands (mālā) and unguents
(upalepana), he scattered them on the place where the Lord stayed, and said this to the
Lord together with his servants: “If the bodhisatva Gaganagañja gives us the treasury of open
space (gaganagañja), we will produce the thought of the incomparable complete awakening
(anuttarasamyaksaṃbodhi).”The bodhisatva Gaganagañja said: “Wicked One, do you see this
treasury of open space?”Māra said: “I see it, son of good family. It is far greater than all
the displays of desire realm, buddha-fields, and my own abode (svabhavana), and it is full
of the jewels for gods and humans.Gaganagañja said: “Wicked One, I will give you all these
treasuries of open space so that you can produce the thought of the incomparable complete
awakening.”Then the wicked Māra, together with his eighty-four thousand creatures, produced
the thought of the incomparable complete awakening.At that time, Durmukha who was the
head of five hundred sons of the Māra, lacking faith and desiring the non-dharma (adharmakāma),
said: “Even though our father produced the thought of awakening, we should strive
against this exposition of religion (dharmaparyāya).”Then the Lord said this to the bodhisatva
Gaganagañja: “Son of good family, elucidate the words of knowledge-mantra (vidyāmantrapada)
by which the evil ones as numerous as the grains of sand in the river Gaṅga are subjugated
(nigraha) and established in awakening.”The bodhisatva Gaganagañja thereupon pronounced
the words of knowledge-mantra as follows:tadyathā | avatte | vivatte | saṃvatte | sahitānusandhi
| duruttaraṇi | nirghātani | maitryāyukte | kāruṇaniṣyande | satyavati | bhūrakṣe
| dharmanivṛtti | dharmarakṣe | akkhule | nikhilini | hulu hulu hulu hulu hulu | tatkāre
| tathāvādite | śīlānuvṛtti | akṣayanirdeśe | kleśaparīkṣe | buddhādhiṣṭhite dharmajvālini
| saṃghānugame | anuttare | anatikramaṇiye | nigrahaṇimārapakṣasya yuktikṛte | adānte
| aśaste | svaviṣayānugame | āryaguṇakāre | siddhisiddhivate | mokṣānukūle | nigrahaṇi parapravadīnāṃ
| dārṣaṇi māraparṣada | avaśāntā | catvāro mahārājānaḥ | śakro devānāṃ indro
brahmā sahapatir | buddhaprasannānāṃ | devanāgayakṣakṛtaṃ paritrāṇaṃ | satvānāṃ svastyayānāṃ
| dharmabhanakānāṃ | ārakṣayai | saddharmasya ca parigrahāya |Then, immediately after
these words of knowledge-mantra were pronounced by the bodhisatva Gaganagañja, the world system
of three thousandfold worlds (trisāhasramahāsāhasralokadhātu) was shaken in six ways.The
five hundred evil ones, who were without faith and clinging to the non-dharma, heard
this sound from open space: “The Māra, his sons, or his followers (mārakāyika), who do not
produce the thought of awakening and do not give up the works of the Māra after having heard
these words of the knowledge-mantra (vidyāmantrapada), the crowns of their heads will
be destroyed by the lighting and blazing thunderbolt of the Yakṣa Vajrapāṇi.”Then, having
looked up at the sky, the sons of the Māra saw five hundred Vajrapāṇis holding blazing thunderbolt,
and produced the thought of awakening from the fear and terror (bhayabhīṭa).The
Lord at that time smiled (atha khalu bhagavān smitaṃ prādurakarot), and the venerable Ānanda
asked its meaning.Then the Lord said: “Ānanda, did you see those five hundred sons of the
Māra producing the thought of the incomparable complete awakening (anuttarasamyaksaṃbodhi)
out of fear and terror?”Ānanda said: “O Lord, I saw it.”The Lord said: “Ānanda, when the
wicked Māra attains awakening, they will also be born in the buddha-fields as bodhisatvas
having different name.”The venerable Ānanda said this to the Lord: “O Lord, when will the
wicked Māra wake up to incomparable complete awakening? What will he be called after having
attained the awakening? And what will be the name of that universe?”The Lord said: “Ānanda,
the wicked Māra, doing the works of the Māra in the buddha-fields of ten directions
again and again, will hear the dharma of destroying vices by the essence of diamond (vajragarbhakleśapramathanadharma)
from the awakened buddhas there, and will see the secret practice,
behaviour, good qualities, maintaining morality, practice, ceremony and application
of the buddhas and the bodhisatvas. Then, as long as he has faith in the thought of awakening,
he will be born [in the universe of] the tathāgata Anantāmaladhvaja, will stop doing
the works of the Māra by the teaching of [the tathāgata there], will maturate this roots
of good, and, by the thought which is no thought, in accordance with all the light of the
dharma of the buddha (sarvabuddhadharmāvabhāsānugata), will produce the thought of awakening.After
that, he will serve, respect, worship, homage and give offerings to the uncountable
and innumerable tathāgatas, and will become a monk following their teachings.Having become
a monk, he will uphold the true dharma (saddharma) in the three times, and bringing innumerable
beings to maturity.After immeasurable forty-four intermediate aeons (antarakalpa),
he will wake up to incomparable complete awakening, and then in the aeon called Viśuddhi
he will be born in the Pariśuddhipratiṣṭhita universe as the tathāgata Supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdha,
worthy of offerings, the perfectly awakened one, perfect in wisdom and conduct
… a blessed one (supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdho nāma tathāgato ’rhan samyakṣaṃbuddho vidyācaraṇasaṃpannaḥ
… bhagavān).Again, Ānanda, the Pariśuddhipratiṣṭhita universe will be thriving,
prosperous, safe, well-provided, and filled with gods and men (ṛddhaś ca sphītaś ca
kṣemaś ca subhikṣaś cākīrṇadevamānuṣaś ca).Ānanda, just as whatever enjoyments (bhoga) or
entertainments (samudācāra) living beings in the Tuṣita Heaven (tuṣitabhavanastha) have,
so there will be enjoyments and entertainments [in that universe.]Ānanda, the tathāgata Supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdha
will live to forty internal aeons (antarakalpa) together with
the great assembly of sixty-four koṭis of disciples and the congregation of twelve thousands
of bodhisatvas.O Ānanda, those who are the Māra’s sons and followers (mārakāyika) at present
will be born in the Pariśuddhipratiṣṭhita universe, will reach the complete unsurpassable
awakening, and will be predicted to attain of incomparable complete awakening by the
tathāgata Supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdha, namely the Māra, in his buddha-field.”

Śakrabrahmalokapāla

When that prophecy (vyākaraṇa) of the wicked Māra was set forth, all the assembly of Indras,
Brahmās and Lokapālas were astonished (āścaryaprāpta), and uttered a joyous utterance (udānam
udānayati): “Even though they have done that many works of the Māra, they still can produce
the thought of incomparable complete awakening by means of meaningfulness of seeing
the tathāgata (tathāgatāmoghadarśana). The discipline of the dharma (dharmavinaya), which
is well spoken (svākhyāta) by the Lord, is marvelous!O Lord, who is the son or daughter of
good family (kulaputrā vā kuladuhitaro vā) who could measure (pramātṛ-) the buddha-fields
(buddhakṣetra) from one person to another (pudgalena pudgalaḥ) because it cannot be measured
by any disciple or isolated buddha?”The Lord said: “So it is, friends. The sphere of
the buddha is just like what you said.However, friends, their thoughts are dependently originated,
and I see living beings who walks with desire and who stops without desire, who wears
a dharma-robe being full of impurities (saṃkleśa) and who puts on the robe without impurities
(kleśa), and who eats porridge out of greed and who stops it without appetite. O
friends, the types of behavior of living beings are so diverse.Since there are living beings
who strive for [the buddha’s] words by understanding a condensed statement (udghaṭitajñā)
or by understanding a full, detailed explanations (vipañcitajña), the tathāgata gives them
the discourses of teaching the dharma, accordingly to each individual (yathāpratyarhadharmāvatāraṇanirdeśa).O
friends, vices are neither established in place nor direction, and
they are neither a collection nor accumulated things.Vices arise superficially (ayoniśas)
but purity arises in the fundamental way (yoniśas). In that way, if you investigate the arising
of vices fundamentally, then they arise as purity.It is therefore, with this in mind,
said that, when one knows wrong views (mithyādṛṣṭi) as wrong views, namely as they really
are (yathābhūta), he will have right views (samyagdṛṣṭi).Wrong views would never be right
views, would never not be right views, would never be separated from right views. However,
if one, after having known wrong views as wrong views, is not established in them without
any action or effort, then he will enter into the way of right views, thus this is called
the right view (samyagdṛṣṭi).O friends, vices are the darkness but the purity is the light.
Vices are of weak power but the expanded vision is powerful. Vices are accidental but
its essential nature is of pure root. Vices are false imaginations but its essential nature
is the absence of false imagination (kavir2 mārṣā kleśāḥ | āloko viśuddhiḥ | durbalāḥ
kleśāḥ | balavatī vipaśyanā | āgantukāḥ kleśāḥ | mūlaviśuddhā prakṛtiḥ | parikalpāḥ kleśāḥ
| aparikalpā prakṛtiḥ).Quotation from RgvbhMS 25a-b?; RgvbhJ 44,8-45,9; RgvbhTib 98a3-b5;
RgvbhChi T1611, 833a15-b9.Rgvbh: kavirmārṣā kleśāḥ | āloko viśuddhiḥ | durbalāḥ kleśāḥ |
balavatī vipaśyanā | āgantukāḥ kleśāḥ | mūlaviśuddhā prakṛtiḥ | parikalpāḥ kleśāḥ | aparikalpā
prakṛtiḥ |RgvbhTib: nam mkha’i dpe ’di rgyas par ni mdo ji lta ba bźin rtogs par bya
ste | draṅ sroṅ chen po ñon moṅs pa ni mun pa | rnam par dag pa ni snaṅ ba’o || ñon moṅs pa
ni stobs chuṅ ba | lhag mthoṅ ni stobs daṅ ldan pa’o || ñon moṅs pa ni glo bur pa | raṅ
bźin gyis rnam par dag pa ni rtsa ba’o || ñon moṅs pa ni kun tu brtags pa | raṅ bźin ni kun
tu ma brtags pa’o ||RgvbhChi: 應知彼經中言。諸 善男子。煩惱本無體。真性本明淨。一切煩惱羸薄。毘婆舍那有大勢力。一切煩惱客塵。自性清淨心根本。一切諸煩惱虛妄分別。自性清淨心如實不分別。It
is like this, friends, this great earth is based on water, water is
supported by wind, wind is founded on space, but space is dependent on nothing. Thus, among
these four elements, namely earth, water, wind, and space, space is more powerful and firmer
than any of the other elements, and is not accumulated. Since it is not accumulated,
it is neither originated nor destroyed and is stable with its own essence (tad yathā mārṣā
iyaṃ mahāpṛthivy apsu pratiṣṭhitā | āpo vāyau pratiṣṭhitāḥ | vāyur ākāśe pratiṣṭhitaḥ | apratiṣṭhitaṃ
cākāśam | evam eṣāṃ caturṇāṃ dhātūnāṃ pṛthivīdhātor abdhātor vāyudhātor ākāśadhātur
eva balī yo dṛḍho ’nupacayo ’napacayo ’nutpanno ’niruddhaḥ sthitaḥ svarasayogena |).Rgvbh:
tad yathā mārṣā iyaṃ mahāpṛthivy apsu pratiṣṭhitā | āpo vāyau pratiṣṭhitāḥ | vāyur
ākāśe pratiṣṭhitaḥ | apratiṣṭhitaṃ cākāśam | evam eṣāṃ caturṇāṃ dhātūnāṃ pṛthivīdhātor abdhātor
vāyudhātor ākāśadhātur eva balī yo dṛḍho ’calo ’nupacayo ’napacayo ’nutpanno ’niruddhaḥ
sthitaḥ svarasayogena |RgvbhTib: draṅ sroṅ chen po ’di lta ste | sa chen po ’di ni chu
la rab tu gnas pa | chu ni rluṅ la rab tu gnas pa | rluṅ ni nam mkha’ la rab tu gnas pa
yin la | nam mkha’ ni gnas pa med pa’o || de bźin du khams bźi po ’di rnams las | sa’i khams
daṅ | chu’i khams daṅ | rluṅ gi khams pas ni nam mkha’i khams ñid stobs daṅ ldan pa | brtan
pa | mi g.yo ba | ’grib pa med pa | skye ba med pa | ’gag pa med pa ste | raṅ gi daṅ
gis gnas pa’o ||RgvbhChi: 諸佛子。譬如大地依水而住。水依風住風依空住。而彼虛空無依住處。諸善男子。如是四大地大水大風大空大。此四大中唯虛空大以為最勝。以為大力。以為堅固。以為不動。以為不作。以為不散。不生不滅自然而住。[On
the contrary,] these three elements [namely, earth, water,
and wind] are endowed with origination and destruction, unstable and of no long duration.
It is perceived that these are changeable, but space is by no means changeable (tatra
ya ete trayo dhātavas ta utpādabhaṅgayuktā anavasthitā acirasthāpinaḥ | dṛśyata eṣāṃ vikāro
na punar ākāśadhātoḥ kaścid vikāraḥ |).Rgvbh: tatra ya ete trayo dhātavas ta utpādabhaṅgayuktā
anavasthitā acirasthāpinaḥ | dṛśyata eṣāṃ vikāro na punar ākāśadhātoḥ kaścid vikāraḥ
|RgvbhTib: de la khams gsum po gaṅ yin pa de dag ni skye ba daṅ ’jig pa daṅ ldan pa | mi
gnas pa yun riṅ du mi gnas pa ste | ’di dag la ni rnam par ’gyur pa mthoṅ gi | nam mkha’i
la ni rnam par ’gyur ba ’ga’ yaṅ med do ||RgvbhChi: 諸善男子。彼三種大生滅相應。無實體性剎那不住。諸佛子。此三種大變異無常。諸佛子。而虛空界常不變異。In
that way, the parts of personality, spheres and fields of perception have
their basis in the actions and vices. The actions and vices have their basis in the superficial
mental effort. The superficial mental effort has its basis in the purity of original
nature. Therefore, it is said that the thought is basically pure but it is sullied by the
occasional vices (evam eva skandhadhātvāyatanāni karmakleśapratiṣṭhitāni | karmakleśā ayoniśomanaskārapratiṣṭhitāḥ
| ayoniśomanaskāraḥ prakṛtipariśuddhipratiṣṭhitaḥ | tata ucyate
prakṛtiprabhāsvaraṃ cittam āgantukair upakleśair upakliśyata iti |).Rgvbh: evam eva skandhadhātvāyatanāni
karmakleśapratiṣṭhitāni | karmakleśā ayoniśomanaskārapratiṣṭhitāḥ | ayoniśomanaskāraḥ
prakṛtipariśuddhipratiṣṭhitaḥ | tata ucyate prakṛtiprabhāsvaraṃ cittam āgantukair
upakleśair upakliśyata iti |RgvbhTib: de bźin du | phuṅ po daṅ | khams daṅ | skye mched
dag ni las daṅ ñon moṅs pa la rab tu gnas pa’o || las daṅ ñon moṅs pa ni tshul bźin ma yin
pa yid la byed pa la rab tu gnas pa | tshul bźin ma yin pa yid la byed pa ni raṅ bźin gyis
yoṅs su dag pa la gnas pa ste | des na sems kyi raṅ bźin ni ’od gsal ba ste | glo bur
gyi ñon moṅs pas ñon ma moṅs pa’o źes brjod do źe’o ||RgvbhChi: 諸佛子。如是陰界入依業煩惱住。諸煩惱業依不正思惟住。不正思惟依於佛性自性清淨心住。以是義故。經中說言。自性清淨心客塵煩惱染。Then
the superficial mental effort, the actions and vices,
and the parts of personality, spheres and fields of perception, all of them are originated
from the combinations of causes and conditions. When causes and conditions are not combined,
they are extinguished. But their original nature is of no cause nor condition. Consequently,
they are never combined. Thus there is no origination nor destruction of it. (tatra
paścād yo ’yoniśomanaskāro ye ca karmakleśā yāni ca skandhadhātvāyatanāni sarva ete
hetupratyayasaṃgṛhītā utpadyante hetupratyayavisāmagryā nirudhyante | yā punaḥ sā prakṛtis
tasyā na hetur na pratyayo na sāmagrī notpādo na nirodhaḥ |).Rgvbh: tatra paścād yo ’yoniśomanaskāro
ye ca karmakleśā yāni ca skandhadhātvāyatanāni sarva ete hetupratyayasaṃgṛhītā
utpadyante hetupratyayavisāmagryā nirudhyante | yā punaḥ sā prakṛtis tasyā na hetur na pratyayo
na sāmagrī notpādo na nirodhaḥ |RgvbhTib: de la tshul bźin ma yin pa’i yid la byed
pa gaṅ yin pa daṅ | las daṅ ñon moṅs pa gaṅ yin pa daṅ | phuṅ po daṅ | khams daṅ | skye mched
gaṅ yin pa’i chos ’di mtha’ dag ni rgyu rkyen gyis bsdus pas skye ba rgyu rkyen daṅ bral
na ’gag par ’gyur gyi | raṅ bźin gaṅ yin pa de ni rgyu med pa | rkyen med pa | tshogs pa
med pa | skye ba med pa | ’gag pa med pa’o ||RgvbhChi: 諸善男子。所有邪念。所有煩惱業。所有陰界入。如是諸法從於因緣和合而生。以諸因緣壞散而滅。諸善男子。彼自性清淨心無因無緣故。無和合不生不滅。The
essential nature is like space, the superficial mental
effort is like wind, the actions and vices are like water, and the parts of personality,
spheres and fields of perception are like earth. Therefore, it is said that all dharmas
are devoid of any root, the root which is established in nothing, the root of purity, and
the root of no root (tatra yathākāśadhātus tathā prakṛtiḥ | yathā vāyudhātus tathāyoniśomanasikāraḥ
| yathābdhātus tathā karmakleśāḥ | yathā pṛthivīdhātus tathā skandhadhātvāyatanāni
| tata ucyante sarvadharmā asāramūlā apratiṣṭhānamūlāḥ śuddhamūlā amūlamūlā iti |).Rgvbh:
tatra yathākāśadhātus tathā prakṛtiḥ | yathā vāyudhātus tathāyoniśomanasikāraḥ | yathābdhātus
tathā karmakleśāḥ | yathā pṛthivīdhātus tathā skandhadhātvāyatanāni | tata ucyante
sarvadharmā asāramūlā apratiṣṭhānamūlāḥ śuddhamūlā amūlamūlā iti |RgvbhTib: de la nam mkha’i
khams ji lta pa de ltar ni raṅ bźin no || rluṅ gi khams ji lta ba de ltar ni tshul bźin
ma yin pa yid la byed pa’o || chu’i khams ji ta ba de ltar ni las daṅ ñon moṅs pa’o ||
sa’i khams ji lta ba de ltar ni phuṅ po daṅ | skye mched daṅ | khams rnams so || des na chos
thams cad ni rtsa ba yoṅs su chad pa ste | sñiṅ po med pa’i rtsa ba can | mi gnas pa’i
rtsa ba can | dag pa’i rtsa ba can | rtsa ba med pa’i rtsa ba can źes brjod do źe’o ||RgvbhChi:
諸善男子。如虛空界。自性清淨心亦復如是。如風大界。不正思惟亦復如是。如水大海。諸業煩惱亦復如是。如地大界。陰界入等亦復如是。是故說言。一切諸法皆無根本。皆無堅實。無住無住本。根本清淨。無根本故。O
friends, since this is the gate into the light of the dharma (dharmālokamukha)
called Prakṛtiviśuddhimukha, the bodhisatvas, having enter into it, are not established
in the gate of any vice (sarvakleśamukha) and not proud of any pure gate as well.Since all
of them destroy haughtiness, they penetrate the suitable way (sārūpyagāminī pratipad) and
transcend all sphere of the Māra.Since they transcend the sphere of the Māra, they are
established in the sphere of the buddha.Since they are established in the sphere of the buddha,
they enter into the sphere of all beings.Since they enter into the sphere of all beings,
they do not agitate the sphere of the absolute truth (dharmadhātu).Since they are in
accordance with the sphere of the absolute truth, they obtain the omniscience (sarvajñajñāna)
by obtaining sameness and no distinction (samanirviśeṣatā).When the teaching was taught,
many bodhisatvas became free from all manifestations of mental disturbance (sarvakaukṛtyaparyutthāna),
manifestation of the hindrances [to obtain] the dharma (dharmāvaraṇaparyutthāna),
and the actions and vices (karmakleśa), and then attained the tolerance that all things
are unborn (anutpattikadharmakṣānti).

Upāsaka Śrīgupta

gaganagañjaparipṛcchā, volume 8Then a lay practitioner by name of Śrīgupta, having bowed down
at the Lord’s feet, addressed himself to the Lord:“O Lord, you set forth this exposition
of religion which is the gate into the liberation from the dharma (dharmavimuktimukhadharmaparyāya)
for me. Why is that? Lord, I tried to kill you by dropping you into a hole or by
serving poisoned food, and even though I heard many teachings from you, I was not able to
clear my doubts. However, Lord, having heard this exposition of religion, I do not have
any doubt and obtain the light of all dharmas (sarvadharmāloka).O Lord, by obtaining the light
without any regret or doubt, I will produce the thought of incomparable complete awakening
and attain distinction just like the wicked Māra.”The Lord said: “Good, very good, householder,
you fully understand the meaning of what I have preached (bhāṣitasyārtha). I prophesy
that you, having honoured, revered, venerated, and worshipped all the buddhas in the
good aeon (bhadrakalpa) with your mind and highest intension (cittādhyāśaya), will practice
the holy life (brahmacaryā) in their places, and will grasp the true dharma (saddharma).After
that, since you have pleased innumerable buddhas, after seven hundred innumerable
aeons (asaṃkhyeyakalpa), in the stainless aeon (amalakalpa), you will be born in the world
as the tathāgata Sarvaparyutthānavikiraṇa, equipped with knowledge, conduct and other qualities,
the Awakened Lord (vidyācaraṇasaṃpanno iti yāvad buddho bhagavān bhaviṣyasi).Having
heard the prophecy of the Lord concerning the incomparable complete awakening, a lay practitioner
Śrīgupta, being contented, elated, enraptured, overjoyed, exultant and jubilant
(tuṣṭodagrāttamanāḥ pramuditaḥ prītisaumanasyajātaḥ), offered all his ornaments for the body
of the Lord, and said:“O Lord, in my house I have four great treasuries, which are full
of gold and plenty of jewels.Among them, one will be given to my wife and children, male
and female slaves and workers (putradāradāsīdāsakarmakara).Another will be given to all the
poor and beggars (sarvadaridrayācanaka).A third will be given to monks coming from four
directions and the monastic communities in four directions.The other will be given to the
monastic community headed by the Buddha (buddhapramukhabhikṣusaṅgha).O Lord, as I do not
have any worldly attachment (amama) nor property (aparigraha), I pray that I may leave the
world for the well-explained discipline, be ordained, and obtain the way as a monk (labheyāhaṃ
svākhyāte dharmavinaye pravrajyām upasampadaṃ bhikṣubhāvam).”Then Śrīgupta thereupon
left the world for the well-explained discipline, was ordained, and obtained the way as a
monk.The bodhisatva Gaganagañja addressed himself to the Lord: “After the tathāgata become
extinguished, O Lord, who will uphold this awakening which has been established for incalculable
koṭis of aeons?”At that time, sixty koṭis of bodhisatvas, having stood up from the
congregation, joined their palms, paid homage to the Lord, and then uttered these verses
in one voice:

