Māra Pāpīyān

When this teaching was taught and verses were accomplished, the wicked Māra, having magically
created four kinds of troops (caturaṅgabala), came to the courtyard where the Lord stayed
with them, stationed them on the outside of the courtyard, disguised himself as a householder
(gṛhapati), went in front of the Lord, and bowed down at his feet (bhagavataḥ pādau
śirobhir vanditvā), saying:“Because these good men, the bodhisatva Gaganagañja and Ratnapāṇi,
are endowed with immeasurable good qualities, and so are the other bodhisatvas, it is
possible to manifest such wonderful teachings (āścaryādbhutadharma) and magical displays (prātihārya)
in this world. However, Lord, will there be someone believing these magical displays
in the future?”The Lord said: “As a small amount of water in the great ocean can be
lifted up by means of the tip of a hair (vālāgrakoṭi), so few beings will have faith in the
magical displays (prātihārya) of these good men. However, there will be great many beings
who do not have faith, compared to the quantity of water in the ocean.”Having heard this
word, the wicked Māra, became contented, elated, enraptured, overjoyed, exultant and jubilant
(atha khalu māraḥ pāpīyāṃs tuṣṭodagrāttamanāḥ pramuditaḥ prītisaumanasyajāto bhavati),
danced and was about to leave the congregation.The the venerable Śāriputra addressed himself
to the Lord: “O Lord, who is this man (puruṣa) going away from this congregation with
so much pleasure?”The Lord said: “O Śāriputra, he is the Māra, who, disguised as a householder,
came to the tathāgata in order to make this exposition of religion (dharmaparyāya)
disappear. Having heard that there will be only few beings who have belief in this religious
exposition, he is about to leave this congregation, joyfully singing, ‘There will be only
few followers of the ascetic Gautama, but mine will be numerous.’”At that time the bodhisatva
Gaganagañja said to the wicked Māra: “Wicked One, why are you leaving after having
shown your true colors?”Then the wicked Māra thought: “Because the bodhisatva Gaganagañja
and other bodhisatvas will come to my territory (māragocara), to say nothing of the tathāgata
(prāg eva tathāgataḥ). So now I will go back to my territory.”Then the bodhisatva Gaganagañja,
having stopped the wicked Māra and his servants in the vault of the sky, exercised
his magical power in such a way (tathādhiṣṭhita) that they could not go back to his territory,
and said this to the Māra: “Wicked One, as open space is without obstruction (anavṛti),
why do you not go back to your territory?”Māra said: “Son of good family, the sky is
without obstruction (gaganam anāvṛtam) to you, but it looks dark to us. The only we can see
in front of us is darkness (tamo’ndhakāra), except for the congregation (parṣanmaṇḍala)
of the Buddha on the ground, which looks luminous.”Gaganagañja said: “So it is, Wicked One,
it is beings who have the light of the dharma in their thoughts (śukladharmacittasatva),
and the darkness in front of you is because of the works of Māra (mārakarman).”Māra said:
“O good man, from now on I will never do the works of Māra.”Gaganagañja said: “As it is
difficult to keep your promise among such wicked beings, you should come down here and listen
the discipline of the dharma (dharmavinaya) taught by the tathāgata, together with your
servants.”Then the wicked Māra and his servants unwillingly (akāmaka) went down from the
vault of the sky, and the bodhisatva Gaganagañja said this to the congregation of bodhisatvas:
“Sons of good family, may all of you elucidate (pratibhātu) the gates into the dharma
of transcending the path of the works of Māra (mārakarmamārgasamatikramadharmamukha).”The
bodhisatva Kāñcanaparvatarāja thereupon said: “Giving up your sphere is to be attached to
the sphere of Māra (māraviṣaya). Knowing that everywhere is the sphere of the buddha (buddhaviṣaya)
is to know the sphere of the buddha. If you do not see the sphere of the buddha,
how can you see your own sphere? In that way the bodhisatva who has transcended the sphere
has also transcended the sphere of Māra. This is the gate into the dharma of transcending
the sphere of Māra.”The bodhisatva Ratnaśrī said: “Since the objects of thought is the
sphere of Māra (māragocara), where there is not any dharma perceived, what would be accomplished
by Māra there? Since the attainment is without basis, the understanding through time
that there is no attainment with basis is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending
the sphere of Māra of the bodhisatva.’”The bodhisatva Ratnapāṇi said: “When you grasp or
possess something, then the Māra will find your weak point (avatāraṃ labh-). When you do not
grasp any dharma, there will be no disagreement with anyone. When you are alone without
the second, you do not make your own thinking or own place [into problem], and then how can
you stay together with the Māra? Thus the bodhisatva who is established in nothing transcends
the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Āryaratna said: “‘Sin’ (āpatti) is an accusation,
and in such an accusation the Māra can find a weak point. What is the absence of sin
(anpatti) is not to enter into the consciousness of following in accordance with the distinguishing
marks [of sins] (nimittānusāriṇavijñānāpraveśa), and thus the bodhisatva who is
established in the limit of no distinguishing mark transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The
bodhisatva Ratnacitta said: “The Lord taught that vices (kleśa) are just like a reflection
(pratibimba) and an illusion (pratibhāsa). Knowing that the reflection and illusion are
not changing nor not changing, not coming nor going, without inside nor outside, and remain
in no location or dimension (sthānāsthānavigatā) is not living with any vice. The vices
do not arise due to the absence of thought-construction; the vices do not cease due to the
absence of thought-construction. In this way, the bodhisatva who is established in the absence
of thought-construction and false imagination transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The
bodhisatva Ratnākara said: “Happiness is a latent tendency (anuśaya); unhappiness is an obstruction.
One who is without happiness or unhappiness does not have any affection (anunaya)
or hostility (pratigha). One who is without affection or hostility is established in sameness.
One who is established in sameness does not differentiate any dharma. One who is
established in the absence of differentiation does not think about sameness or non-sameness.
When you obtain this inconceivable dharma, the Māra cannot find your weak point.”The bodhisatva
Ratnaparityāga said: “The works of Māras (mārakarman) is produced from obsession
with self (ātmasamutthāna). When you are established in the purity of self, what can the Māra
do? Why is that? Because vices are purified by the purity of self (ātmaviśuddhi), and
all dharmas are purified by the purity of vices. That which purifies all dharmas purifies
open space. Thus the bodhisatva who is established in the purity of open space transcends
the sphere of the Māra.The bodhisatva Dharmarāja said: “Just as one, who obtains the consecration
of the king (rājābhiṣeka), and who has power and numerous attendants, is fearless,
just so the bodhisatva, who obtains the consecration, and who has the attendants of the jewel
of the dharma (dharmaratna), has no fear of any Māra. Here the consecration is to reach
the extreme of the qualities of the buddha (paryantabuddhadharma) and to fulfill them,
and the attendants of the jewel of the dharma (dharmaratna) is to learn the dharmas taught
by the buddhas in ten directions. Since the bodhisatva who is established in such a way transcends
the sphere of the Māra, this is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the
sphere of the Māra.’”The bodhisatva Śailaśikharasaṃghaṭṭanarāja said: “Just as the wind
enters through a chink, just so the Māra can find a weak point where there is a chink in thought.
The bodhisatva therefore should not have any chink in his thought. Here, the thought
without chink is, that is to say, to fulfill the emptiness endowed with all sorts of excellencies
(tadyathāpi nāma cchidrān mārutaḥ praviśati evam eva yato yata eva cittasya cchidraṃ
bhavati tatas tata eva māro ’vatāraṃ labhate | tasmāt sadā ’cchidracittena bodhisattvena
bhavitavyaṃ tatreyam acchidracittatā | yad idaṃ sarvākārajñatāyāḥ śūnyatāyāḥ paripūrir).
This is the gate to the light of the dharma (dharmālokamukha) that the bodhisatva transcends
the sphere of the Māra.”Quotation from ŚikṣMS 60b5-7; B 117,7-10; ŚikṣTib(D) 67b1-3;
ŚikṣChi(T.1636) 97c27-98a1.ŚikṣMS: āryagaganagañjasūtre ’py uktaṃ (6) tadyathāpi nāma cchidrān
mārutaḥ praviśati evam eva ‹yato›1 yata eva cittasya cchidraṃ bhavati tatas tata eva
māro ’vatāraṃ labhate tasmāt sadā ’cchidracittena bodhisattvena bhavitavyaṃ tatreyam acchidracittatā
| yad idaṃ sarvvākārajñatāyāḥ śūnyatāyāḥ pari(7)pūrir iti |ŚikṣTib: ’phags pa
nam mkha’ mdzod kyi mdo las kyaṅ | ’di lta ste dper na bu ga nas rluṅ ’jug pa de bźin du
gaṅ daṅ gaṅ nas sems la skyon byuṅ ba de daṅ de ñid nas bdud kyis glags rñed do || de lta
bas na byaṅ chub sems dpa’ rtag tu sems la skyon med par bya’o ||ŚikṣChi: 又虚空藏經云譬如孔隙聲入其中。菩薩亦爾。若心有間隙則魔得其便。是故菩薩令心常無間隙。若心無間隙。則諸相圓滿。及空性圓滿。The
bodhisatva Priyadarśana said: “That among
all kinds of seeing, seeing the buddha and his dharma is the most excellent. Here, seeing
the buddha is not to see form, feeling, perception, formative factors or consciousness. The
correct seeing (samyagdṛṣṭi) is to see the buddha. Seeing the dharma is not to make any
mental effort (manasikāra). The unchanging seeing is to be free from attachment (rāga). Being
free from attachment is to see the dharma. That the bodhisatva comes to be endowed with
seeing the buddha and his dharma in that way is transcending the sphere of the Māra. This
is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra.’”The bodhisatva
Indrajālin said: “Since the deeds of the Māra arises from action [of speech], mental activity
and movements [of body] (iñjitamanyanāsyandita), the bodhisatva should be free from the
basis of action [of speech], mental activity and movements [of body], which are superficial
mental activities (ayoniśomanasikāra). With the thorough practice (yoniśaḥprayoga), the
bodhisatva who is free from action [of speech], mental activity and movements [of body]
transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Guṇarājaprabhāsa said: “As many as there
are antidotes (pratipakṣa), so many are the works of the Māra (mārakarman). The absence
of antidote is [included in] the realm of the dharma (dharmadhātu), and all dharmas are [included
in] the realm of the dharma. Since all dharmas are included in the realm of the dharma
(dharmadhātusamavasaraṇa), all the dharmas are understood through understanding the realm
of the dharma. The works of the Māra is not apprehended apart from the realm of the dharma,
and the realm of the dharma which is the same as the works of the Māra is not different
from suchness (tathatā). In this way, the bodhisatva who enters into one single principle
(ekanaya) transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Gandhahastin said: “The weak
(durbala) can be harmed by the Māra; but the strong (balika) cannot be harmed by the Māra.
The weak is afraid of the three gates of liberation (trivimokṣamukha). Since the strong
is not afraid of the three gates of liberation, namely, directly seeing (pratyakṣa), penetrating
(supratividdha), and meditatively cultivating. One who is not afraid of them transcends
the sphere of the Māra, and thus this is the gate into the light of the dharma (dharmālokamukha)
called ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra.”The bodhisatva Maitreya said:
“Just as the water in the great ocean (mahāsāgara) has a single taste (ekarasa), so all dharmas
in the great ocean of the knowledge of the dharma (dharmajñānasāgara) have a single
taste. Since the works of the Māra (mārakarma) and the works of the buddha (buddhakarma),
both are same in the perspective of emptiness (śūnyatā), signlessness (animitta), wishlessness
(apraṇihita), birthlessness (ajāti), and the absence of origination (anutpāda), the bodhisatva
who enters into the single taste (ekarasa) transcends the sphere of the Māra.”The
bodhisatva Gaganagañja said: “O friends (vata mārṣāḥ), since open space transcends all spheres,
it is not the sphere of sight (cakṣurviṣaya), and likewise it is not the sphere of
hearing, smelling, tasting, body and mind (śrotraghrāṇajihvākāyamanaḥ). Since all dharmas
are the sphere of the essential nature of open space (gaganasvabhāva), body and speech (kāyavāc)
are the light of knowledge (jñānāloka) in accordance with the sameness of open space
(gaganasamatā). Thus the bodhisatva who obtains this light of knowledge transcends the
sphere of the Māra, and this is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the sphere of
the Māra.’”The bodhisatva Mañjuśrī said: “O good man, all you have said is the works of
the Māra and the sphere of the Māra. Why is that? Things expressed by words are a mere information
(vijñapti); but the speech of the buddha (buddhaghoṣa) is beyond verbal expressions
(anakṣara). Since, as many as are words, so many are the works of the Māra, when there
is not any word, nothing would be done by the Māra. Since that which is without word is without
information, one never perceives the self or other (na ātmaparaṃ samanupaśyati). Since
there is no self or others, the dharma which causes benefit or harm does not exist. Understanding
like this is transcending the sphere of the Māra, and, son of good family, this
is the gate into the dharma called ‘Transcending the sphere of the Māra of the bodhisatva.’”Then
the bodhisatva Gaganagañja said this to the wicked Māra: “Wicked One, did you hear
this gate into the dharma of transcending the sphere of the Māra?”Māra said: “Yes, I heard.”Gaganagañja
said: “Wicked One, are you still going to do the works of the Māra among the
bodhisatvas who entered into such guiding principle of the dharma (dharmanaya)?”Māra said:
“Son of good family, by hearing this gate into the dharma of transcending the sphere of
the Māra, I would not dare to do the works of the Māra among those who listen to it, to say
nothing of the bodhisatvas who see it directly (pratyakṣa) by their knowledges.”At that
time, four gods, Saṃcayavigata, Sukhasaṃcaya, Gandhavat, and Prāsādavat, who guarded the
bodhisatvas, said to the Wicked Māra:“In the past, at the place of awakening (bodhimaṇḍa),
the Lord met you, your forces, troops, army and servants directly. At that time, the Lord
touched the ground with the jewels in his hand (ratnapāṇi), which are the accumulation of
friendliness, compassion, generosity, discipline, restrain, gentleness, morality, learning,
concentration, insight, firm and burning effort, merit and knowledge (maitrīkaruṇadānavinayasaṃyamasauratyaśīlaśrutasamādhiprajñādṛḍhottaptavīryapuṇyajñānasaṃbhāra),
and then the
endless, limitless worlds (anantāparyanteṣu lokadhātuṣu) were shaken. In that way it was
manifested that you and your forces were defeated, but will you still do the works of Māra
under the Lord and the bodhisatvas? You should pay homage to the tathāgata and the assembly
of the bodhisatvas!”Then the Wicked One, having conjured up canopies adorned with eighty
four thousand jewels (ratnacchattra), offered them to the congregations. Having held numerous
kinds of divine flowers (divyapuṣpa), incense (gandha), garlands (mālā) and unguents
(upalepana), he scattered them on the place where the Lord stayed, and said this to the
Lord together with his servants: “If the bodhisatva Gaganagañja gives us the treasury of open
space (gaganagañja), we will produce the thought of the incomparable complete awakening
(anuttarasamyaksaṃbodhi).”The bodhisatva Gaganagañja said: “Wicked One, do you see this
treasury of open space?”Māra said: “I see it, son of good family. It is far greater than all
the displays of desire realm, buddha-fields, and my own abode (svabhavana), and it is full
of the jewels for gods and humans.Gaganagañja said: “Wicked One, I will give you all these
treasuries of open space so that you can produce the thought of the incomparable complete
awakening.”Then the wicked Māra, together with his eighty-four thousand creatures, produced
the thought of the incomparable complete awakening.At that time, Durmukha who was the
head of five hundred sons of the Māra, lacking faith and desiring the non-dharma (adharmakāma),
said: “Even though our father produced the thought of awakening, we should strive
against this exposition of religion (dharmaparyāya).”Then the Lord said this to the bodhisatva
Gaganagañja: “Son of good family, elucidate the words of knowledge-mantra (vidyāmantrapada)
by which the evil ones as numerous as the grains of sand in the river Gaṅga are subjugated
(nigraha) and established in awakening.”The bodhisatva Gaganagañja thereupon pronounced
the words of knowledge-mantra as follows:tadyathā | avatte | vivatte | saṃvatte | sahitānusandhi
| duruttaraṇi | nirghātani | maitryāyukte | kāruṇaniṣyande | satyavati | bhūrakṣe
| dharmanivṛtti | dharmarakṣe | akkhule | nikhilini | hulu hulu hulu hulu hulu | tatkāre
| tathāvādite | śīlānuvṛtti | akṣayanirdeśe | kleśaparīkṣe | buddhādhiṣṭhite dharmajvālini
| saṃghānugame | anuttare | anatikramaṇiye | nigrahaṇimārapakṣasya yuktikṛte | adānte
| aśaste | svaviṣayānugame | āryaguṇakāre | siddhisiddhivate | mokṣānukūle | nigrahaṇi parapravadīnāṃ
| dārṣaṇi māraparṣada | avaśāntā | catvāro mahārājānaḥ | śakro devānāṃ indro
brahmā sahapatir | buddhaprasannānāṃ | devanāgayakṣakṛtaṃ paritrāṇaṃ | satvānāṃ svastyayānāṃ
| dharmabhanakānāṃ | ārakṣayai | saddharmasya ca parigrahāya |Then, immediately after
these words of knowledge-mantra were pronounced by the bodhisatva Gaganagañja, the world system
of three thousandfold worlds (trisāhasramahāsāhasralokadhātu) was shaken in six ways.The
five hundred evil ones, who were without faith and clinging to the non-dharma, heard
this sound from open space: “The Māra, his sons, or his followers (mārakāyika), who do not
produce the thought of awakening and do not give up the works of the Māra after having heard
these words of the knowledge-mantra (vidyāmantrapada), the crowns of their heads will
be destroyed by the lighting and blazing thunderbolt of the Yakṣa Vajrapāṇi.”Then, having
looked up at the sky, the sons of the Māra saw five hundred Vajrapāṇis holding blazing thunderbolt,
and produced the thought of awakening from the fear and terror (bhayabhīṭa).The
Lord at that time smiled (atha khalu bhagavān smitaṃ prādurakarot), and the venerable Ānanda
asked its meaning.Then the Lord said: “Ānanda, did you see those five hundred sons of the
Māra producing the thought of the incomparable complete awakening (anuttarasamyaksaṃbodhi)
out of fear and terror?”Ānanda said: “O Lord, I saw it.”The Lord said: “Ānanda, when the
wicked Māra attains awakening, they will also be born in the buddha-fields as bodhisatvas
having different name.”The venerable Ānanda said this to the Lord: “O Lord, when will the
wicked Māra wake up to incomparable complete awakening? What will he be called after having
attained the awakening? And what will be the name of that universe?”The Lord said: “Ānanda,
the wicked Māra, doing the works of the Māra in the buddha-fields of ten directions
again and again, will hear the dharma of destroying vices by the essence of diamond (vajragarbhakleśapramathanadharma)
from the awakened buddhas there, and will see the secret practice,
behaviour, good qualities, maintaining morality, practice, ceremony and application
of the buddhas and the bodhisatvas. Then, as long as he has faith in the thought of awakening,
he will be born [in the universe of] the tathāgata Anantāmaladhvaja, will stop doing
the works of the Māra by the teaching of [the tathāgata there], will maturate this roots
of good, and, by the thought which is no thought, in accordance with all the light of the
dharma of the buddha (sarvabuddhadharmāvabhāsānugata), will produce the thought of awakening.After
that, he will serve, respect, worship, homage and give offerings to the uncountable
and innumerable tathāgatas, and will become a monk following their teachings.Having become
a monk, he will uphold the true dharma (saddharma) in the three times, and bringing innumerable
beings to maturity.After immeasurable forty-four intermediate aeons (antarakalpa),
he will wake up to incomparable complete awakening, and then in the aeon called Viśuddhi
he will be born in the Pariśuddhipratiṣṭhita universe as the tathāgata Supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdha,
worthy of offerings, the perfectly awakened one, perfect in wisdom and conduct
… a blessed one (supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdho nāma tathāgato ’rhan samyakṣaṃbuddho vidyācaraṇasaṃpannaḥ
… bhagavān).Again, Ānanda, the Pariśuddhipratiṣṭhita universe will be thriving,
prosperous, safe, well-provided, and filled with gods and men (ṛddhaś ca sphītaś ca
kṣemaś ca subhikṣaś cākīrṇadevamānuṣaś ca).Ānanda, just as whatever enjoyments (bhoga) or
entertainments (samudācāra) living beings in the Tuṣita Heaven (tuṣitabhavanastha) have,
so there will be enjoyments and entertainments [in that universe.]Ānanda, the tathāgata Supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdha
will live to forty internal aeons (antarakalpa) together with
the great assembly of sixty-four koṭis of disciples and the congregation of twelve thousands
of bodhisatvas.O Ānanda, those who are the Māra’s sons and followers (mārakāyika) at present
will be born in the Pariśuddhipratiṣṭhita universe, will reach the complete unsurpassable
awakening, and will be predicted to attain of incomparable complete awakening by the
tathāgata Supratiṣṭhitadharmālokalabdha, namely the Māra, in his buddha-field.”

